[Music] Eli, it's good to have you back for V2. You were sharing so much interesting uh novel things about search on LinkedIn and Twitter or X and the like. So, I figured let's not wait a couple months. Let's get you on here. And I think a great place to start with that is just kind of the current pulse uh from the market like from search people you're talking to what are people saying out there? So I think there's like some interesting stuff happening around the way search is viewed which is unfortunately leading to a lot of marketing layoffs. So from the the higherup standpoint, search is volatile and because it's volatile and there's some sort of budget constrained environment, search is on the chopping block. And I I think that maybe is twofold and I I do want to write about this a little bit more as I think about it and talk to more people. I think SEO in general has a really hard time explaining themselves and defending themselves. And there's like, you know, everyone makes fun of SEO. says it. They they say it depends and they're not clear and they're not confident and their our predictions are are, you know, janky at times and our forecasts are made up and all that, but that will lead to times like this when for whatever reason CMOs are being forced to cut budget and then they look at their teams, you're like, well, I don't really know what SEO has done for me in the last year. So I I feel confident that if I get rid of this SEO person or SEO team or SEO agency, things will still be fine and I have more money to focus on whatever other channel. And maybe it's, you know, AI optimization, maybe it's AI content, maybe it's a PR agency, whatever it is, but like SEO hasn't done enough to say like, hey, we matter. This is really important. Don't fire us. Don't get rid of the agency. And I I see a lot of that happening now. But I I also feel really confident that that's a mistake. And from the companies I'm talking to that are making this mistake, they are of the the belief that things will be fine for them. And I don't think that's correct. I think that things will absolutely not be fine for them. They're they're going to see a a raw deal in the next year and they will be panicking, which means I'm doing something a little bit counterproductive. I've actually increased all of my proposals and increased my consulting rates for this year because I know I won't close them, but I'm high anchoring for that point in time in 6 months from now when they're going to come back and say, "Hey, yeah, we do need to prioritize SEO or the, you know, agency that we went with that was cheap actually didn't help us with our, you know, our goals." So, I'm high anchoring. Maybe I'll negotiate at that point, but at this point, I don't want to be that the lowest option and and win consulting clients just because I'm cheap. Makes sense. I I mean, even looking it's my sense is it's like not just looking back, but it's also perception of Ford. It's like there's a lot there has been a lot of apocalypse talk. The trailing 6 months I think is even calming down a little bit from where it was that the world is not over. uh we're going to be around for a while uh with search and I wonder if that's the kind of CMO budget cutting mindset too for that SEO will still be a channel at your point in a year two years and they're going to be like why didn't we invest in this and they're going to call call it be lie again. Yeah. I mean it's the thing I've been saying a lot it's like I I think that the way SEO is viewed is incorrect. I think the way people view the way leaders view SEO, it's, you know, they, it's funny, they almost still view it from like the 15-year-old version of SEO, like we're tweaking keywords and and title tags, and they're like, I don't need that because like we're AI. We don't we don't need that like stuff, you know, 15 synonyms in a piece of content. You guys are obsolete. And what I'm what I've been saying is like the role of SEO is absolutely not that. The role of SEO is to be that translation layer between a user and a search engine and that search engine today is Google with you know 90 plus% of the market in 5 years from now I think it'll still be Google but it may not be it may be chat GBT it may be you know Amazon it may be Apple whatever it is but the role of SEO is still to be that translation layer so today's SEO tactics are fairly similar to 10 year ago SEO tactics but again 5 years from now the SEO tactics will be a little different if we've moved over to Amazon or Apple or Meta or whatever it is or Chat GBT, but it's the role of SEO to use those tactics. So maybe we're all doing AI searches, but then who is supposed to optimize the website and understand the users to have a website show up in AI searches? That's SEO. So today's SEO might be obsolete and probably will be obsolete and probably should be obsolete, but if SEO adapts, that's still the new job. And I think it's funny that uh I see a lot of talk on LinkedIn about is it called uh geo? Have you seen this stuff? Gio. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. And it's stupid. It's like I'm rolling my eyes again. The focus is on the wrong place. It's on the engine instead of like again I think SEO is that layer between SE between the search engine or the search product whether it's an engine or not and the user and SEO translates that we don't need to change the name like you're still optimizing for users that use search. Yeah, we there was a phase there where we felt like almost needing to market to that and and there are a few different things that we suggest impact it and it's not a bad idea to make sure search engines can crawl like make sure you're index you're allowing them to index your information like small things like that are not not bad but people who are spinning up entire products it's just like such it's just Yes. Well, I I mean I just had a newsletter on this topic. We're like the tactics are actually the same. You want to be visible and you want to build links, not links really, but real build visibility which is obviously what you do to show the engines or I don't know do we call them engines whatever they are to show the products that are doing the human level reasoning that you are important. So if you're selling um you know SAS let's say you are in the analytics space and someone does a search instead of a a search on on a search engine they do a prompt of like tell me the best analytics tools. Well having using the keyword analytics many many times in your website isn't going to move that needle. It's really going to be like well how do you appeal to users? How do you show users that you are the best analytics product in the world? Well, a lot of people talk about you as the best analytics product in the world, and where people talk about you changes. So, I don't know yet whether Google or any of these other engines are using actual Twitter/X data, but they should or are they they're definitely using Reddit and they the like the level of content they're using to understand what is important should expand. So, our old way of understanding link building was domain authority. Oh, it has to be a really important website. Twitter doesn't count. Uh Pinterest does maybe doesn't count. Facebook doesn't count because it's social media and that does not have real domain authority and you know there'll be all these complicated ways of well if you look at it it's like a big website and then you know waters down the domain authority but really if you're trying to be a AI engine which thinks like a human I would love to count social media because that's where you get the real people validating something and then the push back might be like well how do you trust social media it can be gamed well how do you as a human trust social media well you assess a profile You assess content, say, "Is that real? Is that misinformation? Is that a fake profile?" The AI engines do the exact same thing like humans. Yes, there's they're not humans. There's flaws, but that's the idea. So, this whole idea of like, hey, do SEO uh differently for AI. Well, it's the same as it always is, like be visible, show authority. Yeah. And maybe there's like little edge things you can do today, like has always been the case with SEO, but this stuff is moving. so fast like it's like why why do do those little edge case optimizations when we can make a much bigger difference doing the the big totally big I think the edges will disappear also because of the feedback loop so with regular SEO the feedback loop and I I've had this like obviously all these friends on the Google search team just because of where I live um I live right near Google and I'll say things to them like hey uh what's the deal with like I don't know Let's pick on Reddit. What's the deal with all this Reddit and like terrible Reddit spam and they'll be like, "Yeah, yeah, we know about it, right?" Or I'll I'll ask about like overoptimized content. I even asked about like the site reputation abuse. I've been asking them about it for years. The that was where they they nixed all the media websites that were being fake groups. So I asked them about it years ago. I'm like, "Hey, why do you guys like let this thing?" They're like, "Yeah, yeah, yeah. We know about it." Like, but you they need to write an algorithm to like go nail it. and they write sometimes they write the algorithm and a site reputation abuse is a perfect example of it and didn't work because like it didn't get the right content cuz they didn't it's not like um by actually is a little bit more manual the BU is search engine of China so it's not like you know the Google engineers are like okay from now on these LA Times URLs don't get to show up but all these other LA Times URLs do get to show up because that's it's not manual that just gets messy it's an algorithm so they say if it looks like this, then don't show up. If it doesn't look like that, it's fine. It's still LA Times or same with CNN, Wall Street Journal, all those big media properties. So, they launched and it didn't work. And AI is much faster because AI is constantly training itself. So, if you find that edge case, you're like, "Wow, if you spam, I don't know, you get a 100,000 Twitter accounts all like with bots and they all tweet the exact same thing, then you'll show up in AI and you're you shouldn't be there." Well, then a bunch of real users use AI and they're like, "Oh, don't show that thing. Obviously, that's not the product I'm looking for." Well, you've just trained AI not only to not show that website, but you've also trained AI to like question itself. Why did we show that website? Oh, it's because 100,000 Twitter accounts. Okay, in the future, we're not going to do that exact thing. So, it learns so much faster and it doesn't need an algorithm update. Like I know like I learned all of my greatest technical SEO by getting brutalized by the Google Panda update and it took us forever to get out because Google had to keep running that Algo update like it not real time at all. It's a product. Yeah. No, I I agree. Those are uh definitely how I'd perceive it as well. I mean increasingly it it's very very difficult to not be a good product and and succeed in today's world and all all those trying to exploit the edge cases are it's a fool's game for potentially getting surfaced um for a moment in time before the the AI adapts to it. So you have a you put out a great book product SEO. I think you definitely were a big part of this kind of framing becoming more popular over time. What What year did you publish your book? It came out in 2021. So, I missed out on all like the good stuff people do when they write books like have book signings and go on book tours. I just sat on Zoom. Nice. Well, I I see in the search trend data it's it's kind of flat up until 2021 and then there's starting to be an ascent of searches around product SEO. Um I didn't look at productled SEO but I assume there's some variations on that but like historically we had this kind of church and state of link building and technical I or content and technical and in a lot of ways and and thinking about your book I also talked to Shirana from boat setter and uh and um Angie and Retail Me Not on our podcast recently about product SEO. I'm just more of the mind recently that this is just the new technical SEO. It's like how we should be framing the other thing other than content. It's not technical and content. It's product SEO and content. Is that a fair assessment or like how are you perceiving that yourself? So I I I wrote the book uh for fun. I mean, I wrote the book because I was like quitting my job, my full-time job at Survey Monkey, and I just wanted to have like a point of view on how I was going to sell consulting. I never thought I would sell so many books and like, you know, people would talk about it. I never thought anyone I knew would even know I had a book. I felt like I was going to go meet friends and they be like, "Oh, you have a book since when?" Like, "Where do I where'd I find it?" And like now I I have all these conversations like, "I love your book." like I honored that people read my words and like that that's like a really special feeling. But I I really wrote it because it was just this point of view of there has to be something different about SEO. Like technical SEO, I mean there's the best technical SEO guide you could really get is from Google. They tell you what to do to do good technical SEO for your website. And it's almost not even required anymore. Like Google has gotten really good that even if you don't do great technical SEO, they can still figure it out. And most people don't like intentionally make technical mistakes. Like most CMS's are pretty good technical SEO. So there's not a lot of like margin you can get out of improving technical SEO. I know there's agencies that sell technical SEO audits. I recently talked to a massive company about like why their SEO is down 60%. They were insisting on getting a technical SEO audit and like that's not your issue unless like you brought in a new CTO who broke your entire website. like that's not why your website is down 60%. But they wanted a technical SEO audit. So I I recommended an agency to go do that for them. But in the for most cases, you're not going to get massive improvements out of technical SEO. And then flipping over to links, uh links is the way of getting links is has changed. Like when I first started doing SEO and you first started doing SEO actually I remember your SEO talk on links at Moz in Moz in I don't know your first one long time ago 2011 maybe 2012 13 something one of those years like you could acquire links you could buy links and now the engines it's been many years the engines have gotten much smarter and like we were just talking about AI and how it understands context and knows whether it's manipulated so that also like you have to work much harder and I think the next level is product SEO where you can't just write a piece of content and expect that it'll resonate with users. You really have to massage your website, massage your product so it makes sense exactly for the users. And at a at a scaled level, that's product SEO. So if you want to appeal to actual users, the product itself has to appeal to those users in the funnel. And I think that's changing because those other ways of doing SEO just don't work anymore. And when I first wrote the book, they did work. Like you could, you know, do a technical SEO audit, maybe get some margins. You could write a lot of content and get a little bit more traffic. You probably could buy a bunch of links and have million-dollar link budgets and and, you know, improve your rankings. And I think now it doesn't work. And the best thing about product SEO for those that like want to start really investing into it, it's hard. And the harder it is, the harder anything in marketing is, the better it is for you because you build a moat. So if any sort of marketing was just like, oh, those with the deepest pockets will win. Well, then you just get deeper pockets, like raise more money, like be cheaper, do something, and then you win. And it's not like that. Mark marketing is obviously like being creative and doing something that appeals to users. And product SEO is that. It's like layering on your creativity, your ability to see things that others don't see and build for the user. Yeah. With with technical, I mean, it was like two sides of the coins. There were two more things broken and also if you Yeah. There's now there's less things broken and also you essentially can only get to you have a fixed website and your competitors can also get to a fixed website. You can't compete on your website not being broken. you have to compete on something that's normally the quality of the product and if we're integrated in product as SEOs that's the lever that can go perpetually hypothetically maybe some some commodity products that's a little harder to do but for things that aren't commodities I mean you can definitely assist in that so much uh so like yeah guiding on user experience all those things and just putting a name on it I think that was just an important part like I was struggling for so long I was kind of like it's really site sitewide SEO it's just SEO consulting but then yeah I mean maybe it's just obvious in retrospect but this pro you you helped kind of popularize it so thank you for that yeah totally unintentional and right time right place but I I I think I think there's more people are going to be gravitating towards as they figure out that other things don't work but you know to be transparent most people don't know that yet so again I I talked consulting potential consulting clients all the time and they want that old stuff they they want the technical SEO they want the link building they want content roadmaps and like that you know one of the biggest problems with content in general if that's your only approach to SEO it doesn't scale right so if you're doing product SEO you're I mean if you find a scalable way to do it like the companies you mentioned like Retail Me not Angie that scales into you know hundreds of thousands of unique assets but if you're just doing content well I mean if I when I was At Survey Monkey, we had a team of I think four content writers and they were producing maybe 12 pieces per month. So that meant at a regular year we were producing less than 150 pieces of content and if each one of those pieces of content would appeal to you know let's say 10,000 users that doesn't really scale at all. Whereas if you do product SEO and you have all these pages each one of those pages maybe appeals to a thousand users that scales pretty well. So that's that's the challenge. And then uh this is another thing obviously we have to talk about which is AI content. So AI content and this is maybe is why there are layoffs in SEO. So CMOs CEOs think this is the unlock. You know I have obviously I understood the the content problem that I can only produce as much content as I have people and money but AI content now it's infinite. Well that's a challenge because they're producing some really really bad content. I'm I'm seeing websites that have like one service or one product in a small area like in upstate New York they have like uh you know it's a doctor in upstate New York and they have 150,000 pages like that makes no sense and there that's like a fast way to a Google penalty and the content thin it looks obviously AI written and I don't think Google despises AI content the same way they I mean they I think Google approaches AI content the same way they approached content you bought for $5 off of Fiverr from, you know, the Philippines or, you know, any other country where you can buy things at a at a lower labor rate. It has to be good content. It has to appeal to users. And if you are a doctor's office in upstate New York, you don't need 150,000 pages. And like that's the way approaching it. So AI content is not the solution. I think AI content AI in general is a tool for the content writers you have. This the real solution is product SEO. Yeah. What we're increasingly saying is the ven diagram of the two is like that dichotomy of people that are like I'm AI content I'm pressing a button and then I'm human content really the best is the inter intersection of those two things um sparring partner and uh but yeah it's so interesting here feel you feel a culture of certain companies that come in the door um from a lead standpoint and you can just we not surprisingly we're getting a ton of AI leads and sometimes It's just the nature of that denomination means they want AI content and you just know that's not going to result and they've already done it in a lot of times and maybe it's going to helping their their traction graphs but not actual conversion graphs which hopefully the VCs eventually come back to at some point. Yeah. Yeah. One other challenge with product SEO is that you need more participants. So with content, you don't really if you're an SEO manager and you're doing content SEO, you don't need anything other than money. You just use your money and you buy freelance content on Upwork or any other marketplace and that's your SEO. If you're uh technical SEO, that's that's a little bit more challenging. You're you know, you're writing tickets. You know, one of the dirty secrets of technical SEO is that most stuff is never executed against because it needs a bunch of other people to do it. But from your SEO output standpoint, you've identified a bunch of stuff and you've written a lot of tickets and in theory you're doing a good job. When it comes to links, again, you don't need anything other than budget. You just, you know, hire an agency and they get you the links. When it comes to product SEO, now you're getting deep into the guts of the company and you need more people to shift the way they approach everything. And you're a product manager. You're you're different. you're you're a a conductor having other people do stuff and that is very very challenging. So many companies don't execute on it and like I talk to you know leads all the time and we talk about how they can shift their SEO and then they just they just look at me like that's impossible. I'm the CMO. Like the the CTO will not listen to me. Or, oh, you're talking to me about this product stuff. I'm the CMO. We have a chief product officer and they're not on this me call and they're not going to do it. Or they'll say things like, oh, I'm the CMO, but we have an agency of record for SEO and they don't do that. So, we can't do this. We're just not going to do it. Sounds sounds nice. It's a nice thing you're talking about this product thing, but yeah, that's not what we're going to do. So the inertia against really shifting this whole approach to SEO is tough because like you need so many more people to go along with it. And I found that the only time that companies really go along with it is when they can either see the future and know that like the future's not bright if they continue doing what they're doing or they've hit a bottom. So they've tried everything. There's a a company I talked to recently, one of these massive startups that will probably IPO when the IPO market opens up. So, like a series H startup, and they've they've uh they're on their fourth agency. So, they keep doing this and they keep firing the agency like, "Oh, this doesn't work." Again, the pro this is one of those companies where they have so many other irons in the fire where like they're doing TV ads and they're doing billboards and they have, you know, thousands of salespeople, but SEO is a channel that should work for them and it doesn't work for them because they're approaching it those other ways. Like they keep hiring agencies to do technical audits. They keep hiring agencies to buy links. They keep hiring agencies to like build content. And they've even built a little product SEO, but they built it easy. They didn't really ingrain like the way they're going to do it. They had the content team build some product SEO and they have not hit bottom yet. Like they know they're hitting bottom, but they keep blaming external factors like, "Oh, that agency sucked." So, we fire that agency. We just brought a new one in. Things are going to be different. And now they're on the fourth agency. And I did try to pitch them on like, "Hey, you know, you you realize you're when I'm I was talking to them before they hired the fourth agency." I'm like, "Hey, this is this is time number four. Like, maybe it's time to do something different." But they didn't they didn't opt for that. They they opted to hire an agency that basically, you know, sang from the so this sing the same song everyone else did of like, hey, we're going to do better technical, better content. So that's on them. Yeah, that should be some rule. You're just not allowed to hire X amount of agencies. But completely agree is I mean it's it's I'll hear people c more recently heard someone say like, "Oh, we trial this other agency. We did they did one thing and it didn't hit the mark. I'm like, "Oh, no wonder." Like, you had them only do one thing. Like, that's not setting them up for success. I mean, I get triing people, but um that can be problematic to su to success. And yeah, if you fired three agencies, you're the problem. Certainly. Actually, a really good analogy for this is something I'm dealing with right now. So, like I'm in California, we have to file taxes for uh corporations on March 15th. So, that's next week. I'm like dealing with my accountant and I think where we are with SEO is very similar to like filing taxes. So your accountant just files the taxes of the numbers that you report. There's not going to be much variance between tax filers. If you really want to improve your tax situation, you got to change the business. change the way like you spend money and make money, invest money, and then you give the numbers over to the the accountant and then your tax situation looks a lot different. And I think where companies are are like focusing is like, hey, uh that other accountant made me pay too many taxes. I fired that accountant, now I got this new accountant and everything's going to be totally different. Like, no, it's it that all the accountant does is like fix what you give them or or really put together what you've given them. where SEO should be is we're modifying like where we should be again not a good analogy for you know for where we are in a company but it's the CFO that's where SEO should be thinking like let's change the way we approach business and let's change the way all this and then that outcome looks a little bit different and I think many companies are still expecting SEO to like be different but SEO is really at the margins all the same like I have not seen a a technical audit look any different between any agency I've not seen any content road maps look any different. It's basically like Hrefs Semrush with some color coding like hey these are the top things you're going to do. Maybe they get a little you know creative and like pull in some answer the public or something like that but it's all really the same. That's not different. There's no difference between the agencies there. We could go down a rabbit hole in there. I like our road maps. We do offer road maps but um I haven't seen other Yo, you're totally creative. You're thinking about the user. I I you are not the typical agency. That's why that's why I like you and we talk all the time. All right. I appreciate that. So, I mean, it's been a while since you published that book. Anything you would kind of like reflect or update on three, four years later? I probably wouldn't even focus on technical SEO at all. So, like when I wrote it, I had to focus on technical SEO. I'd probably pull that out completely because I think it's it's unnecessary and a little confusing. And I would obviously add in some AI. There you go. That makes sense. You're great at controversial takes that are accurate. What is something you believe in from SEO standpoint that most people would disagree with you in our current industry? I think that most companies shouldn't bother doing SEO. And the reason is is because they don't map through what an SEO funnel looks like. And I know it's it's very hard for agencies who have to pay employees. It's much easier for me because I don't have any employees. And like if I sign a client, that's good and I want to sign as many clients as possible, but if I I don't, it's not like I have to fire anybody. So I again, I think a lot of SEO agencies pitch SEO and when I talk to them, I talk to the agency owners like, "Hey, that doesn't seem like it's going to work out or like I heard like I talked to this client and then they ended up going with you. I don't think that's a good idea. Like I don't see SEO being part of their funnel. Why did you sign them?" And you know, it's hard for them to be transparent about that, but like a lot of times those those relationships do end up badly because it's not a fit. And I I stumbled upon this accidentally like one of my first consulting clients was an analytics company and their analytics tool cost hundreds of thousands of dollars and had to be baked into the product. So I did typical SEO. I gave them an SEO audit and I, you know, made recommendations on content and SEO didn't seem to be working. I was only on a three-month contract. So, like SEO didn't work my entire contract or a six-month contract. Didn't work my entire contract. I was like, what what am I doing wrong here? And then as I looked at their analytics tool, so they have great analytics. As I looked at their analytics, I realized that SEO made no sense for their funnel. They cost hundreds of thousands of dollars, which meant that that spending that amount of money, there had to be multiple decision makers. So, it wasn't like e-commerce where, you know, it's uh it's 10:45 in the morning in in California and I've already made multiple e-commerce purchases and I didn't have to check in with anybody open my phone. I Googled and I purchased, right? So, uh when it comes to making a hundreds of thousands of dollar purchase for a company that doesn't happen like that like you do some googling, you're like, "Oh, analytics. Okay, let me bookmark this for later." you know, next week when I meet my boss, we'll have oneonone and then when we, you know, we'll meet the CFO, we'll talk about these things, we'll meet the engineers, we'll talk about these things like doesn't happen from SEO. So, like that was one like that there was multiple decision makers. The second was the timeline and the amount of touches that had to happen. So, e-commerce, I Google, I buy and I'm done. No more touches unless there's retargeting. But when it comes to like a big expensive SAS purchase, so I Google, I find something, I you know, then I go to G2, then I go to Capterara, then I go to all these other places, I I, you know, watch some YouTube videos. SEO might have mattered, but by the by the time it was done, you had no idea because like a salesperson had to fly out to the office and like, you know, meet and demo the product. Like maybe that's what closed the deal. SEO might have helped, but you have no idea. And just like so long in there. So then when I start thinking about like where SEO matters, if I were that company, I wouldn't invest in SEO. So when my my contract ended, they hired an agency. So they continue to invest in SEO. But when I that's that's really the way I approach it in any potential engagement is who's searching, what are they searching for, and how does SEO work in in this journey, and how does this work in this funnel? And I think in many cases, it doesn't really work. So if it's something super novel, there's no search volume. If it's something with a really long purchase funnel, there's very little SEO. If it's something that's very, very expensive, like uh a house, does SEO matter for a house? I mean, maybe. Right. Like, you know how you have all those uh realtors and they put like, you know, the domain name on the sign for the for the house. Yeah. Right. So, like, does that does that matter? Well, realtors will never know, right? But like they're not doing any analytics on it. But th those little things, what mattered the most in that house purchase? Like SEO maybe, but like you'll never know. So like as you think about that journey, like how does someone find a house? Like well, maybe they subscribe to a newsletter or maybe they drove down the street. So that's the way I think about it. And then if you really calculate how much SEO is going to cost, so many agencies cost upwards of $10,000 per month just because that's the cost of time. And you know, so that's $120,000 for the year. And then there's all the engineering and the design and the content, you know, for a company could end up being in the millions that they're really indirectly indirectly investing in SEO. And then you're like, well, how much does it matter? Are we going to ever get ROI on those millions? Some companies, yes, many times, and some companies probably not. And like that's that's the thing. So, I approach every conversation from the standpoint of like, is there an SEO buyer here? And is this a channel worth funding or not? And if not, there's other channels like there's there's content, there's PR content, which I think is a fantastic channel and I think you do a great job of. And then there's their paid media. There's companies that I love this when I talk to companies and ask them why they don't do any paid media like with Google or Meta and they're like it's too expensive. I hear that so often. Like that's like it's a weird response. So, like you'd rather spend on SEO because it's theoretically cheaper but has less conversion opportunity than like spend on something that's, you know, seems to be too expensive that that's not necessarily logical to me. Yeah, there is a messy middle in there where those very high price things hypothetically you introduce one buyer, you've paid for the SEO that you described. Like so how do you so that's like I have a personal example of that where we will do SEO for ourselves and rarely is there attribution to it but there'll be like one customer per year that's worth $250,000 that very clearly attributes to it and it um obviously there's energy that there's unwritten costs that go into that and it doesn't scale. I think that's undoubtable. I know you think in scaling. Um, so that's problematic if you're like thinking about like how does this company become a $50 million company? It's probably not on the back of SEO, but is there something productive there? Maybe. Yeah. But I I think it comes down to like how much you're spending on that. So like if you're using your employees time to do SEO, you haven't really chosen to make a massive investment there. So, let's say um and this is one that I I think will be interesting how it plays out in the future with all these other channels, but I I think potentially influencer is going to grow as a marketing channel. Like many companies are not using influencer yet, but many companies are probably going to start turning that on because there's ways to use influencers and micro influencers within an industry. And that's where you maybe get attribution, maybe don't get attribution. And it does that SEO thing where like you get like you look bigger, you seem more important. So micro influencer might mean you pay like notion as an example. They just paid Snoop Dogg to do this whole thing on on LinkedIn. I don't know if that makes any sense. I'm sure Snoop Dogg wasn't cheap. But like could you pay a micro influencer $1,000 a month to just like talk about you and use you? Maybe there's no attribution, but that seems like a good idea. But should you pay Snoop Dogg? So, like that's where you think about that messy middle and SEO makes sense. And like I do my own SEO, too. And I'm sure like I just optimize for my name and my book, but I'm not spending any money on it. And I think that's the decision. And like how much money should you spend on it? So, I talked about this on other podcasts where like I interviewed at Google um during the pandemic. So, I interviewed and didn't have to go there. So, I figured it's an interesting role and it's always fun to talk to Googlers from that perspective. So, I was interviewing for this role to do SEO for Google Cloud. And when we started the interviews, the interviewers would say to me like, "Hey, do you have any questions for me?" And I'd be like, "Yeah, I have a couple." And then I used up all the time asking them all the questions cuz like I was just, you know, maybe I take the job, maybe I wouldn't, but I was actually more curious. And my main question was like, "Why are you doing SEO? You have like you're Google Cloud." And I I also pushed them on. They're like, "Hey, you're Google. Don't you know someone? You didn't get the job." Right. I think No, they it they they ended up closing the wreck. It was one of those things I've interviewed at Google multiple times. Like I did really well and they're like, "Oh, sorry. Yeah, we've changed the wreck." So, it's it always ends up feeling like a waste of time. But it's interesting to talk and learn from Google. But like Google had two they have two competitors for Google Cloud. They have Amazon and Microsoft. And uh like I learned from the analytics client, I highly doubt that SEOs can influence that decision. But the big thing around that is Google Cloud makes billions of dollars. So should Google spend a million of those billions on SEO even if it doesn't necessarily attribute? Yeah, it's fine. Like it's a rounding error for them. But if you're like a venture funded startup and you've just raised $10 million, should you spend one of those $10 million on SEO effort that you can't really attribute and even crystallize what that funnel might look like. So probably not like that's the way I'd approach it. If you are you're Open AI and you have hundreds of millions of dollars to toss at SEO and I don't even know if Open AI does SEO then maybe um Perplexi is a great example like they are doing SEO. Is that effective? I don't know. But they're also doing all these other things and they have lots of money to throw around. So that's the way I would calculate it is like is there some sort of journey here? And if so, how much do you have to invest in that journey? And what's the trade-off of that journey? And a lot of times, like I have these conversations, there's a very clear trade-off because if they're peeling money away from SEO or sorry, putting money into SEO, they're peeling money away from one of those other channels like paid marketing, which could be expensive, but it works. Like they know their CAC, they know their LTV and they're taking money to invest in SEO. So, that's a bet. Whereas, like if you're if you're Google, they didn't really take money from anywhere. They're just like they just created another million dollars to spend at SEO. Yeah. Going back to the product SEO conversation, one of the things we're thinking about more recently and I think ties to this a little bit is if you're making recommendations that have value independent of the SEO outcome, which I think is happening more and more, that becomes even more blurry as a conversation like is the value like would I be creating value for this company for their product pages even if search didn't exist? If so, hypothetically that ROI equation, we're doing that on the content side, too. Like we're doing more thought leadership, sales enablement content and like all that could directly drive more outcomes for them from a link standpoint that but also hopefully brand recognition that drives more clicks. But yeah, more of those like secondary effort things um I think make that more productive generally. Yeah. Yeah. And I I think that's where a lot of SEO agencies fail in their efforts, which is they're using keyword research to inform the content roadmap. And I like what you're saying, and that's something I did at Survey Monkey, where if you focus on the journey, you write content even if the keyword research doesn't support it. So an example of this is branded content. So many SEO agencies would never write branded content because it just doesn't seem sexy to like get hired by an a company and then write a bunch of content about their brand. But if you're focused on the journey and you're focused on conversions, you should write content about their brand. Like when I when I was a survey monkey, one of the the keywords we did not own for whatever reason was pricing. So we didn't own Survey Monkey pricing. I forget who was ranking on it. We didn't own it. And I spent a lot of effort on that. Like it was a weird thing to be like, "Hey, I'm spending the next 3 to 6 months on ranking on our own term for pricing." But when once we ranked on it, we converted at a very high level. And I again, I forget who was outranking us. It might have been one of those like G2s or Capteras. So when they were ranking on it, they were selling us back our own branded traffic. So there was very clear bottom line revenue that was attributed to the fact that we now were we're outranking them. And I I think, you know, I again I love the way you're approaching this that this is sales enablement content. This is geared towards conversions, but most SEO efforts are not. They're really geared towards keyword research and then sorting by top search volume. Yeah, agreed. It's done well. It's getting blur. I mean, it was always probably the case that blurred together is the best way to do it, but now it's just like you literally have to do that most likely. Um, and so many of these things, uh, is there anything you've recently changed your mind on? Could be from a search standpoint. I think that interesting here. I I would I really thought there would be an apocalypse from AI. And I I thought that many companies would see their search volume decrease from AI. And I'm wrong. And I I think there are two reasons I was wrong. One is AI is not nearly as popular as everyone thinks it is. like there just not that many people that are doing I know like whenever I say these things everyone's like well I haven't googled anything in the last year I only use chatbt so like you know there's a corner cases that's fine like there will always be people like that but I don't think the data supports that the entire world is using chatbt and uh despite what you're going to read on LinkedIn and uh the second thing is I also think that a lot of search is I mean a lot of AI is is basically just like search results so while Google's not breaking out what came from AI. It's it's sort of the same thing and users don't really like it as much. So, they're just still clicking on the same place. I have not seen that many businesses and I I have access to many search consoles of information only companies and I I don't think for the most part there is an apocalypse. There are definitely companies that have lost traffic and maybe they deserve to lose traffic because like they didn't have the best content. There's al it's also a weird environment because in the last I guess it's been a year a little bit more than a year since like AI really like rolled out to everyone then uh there's also been multiple algo updates so it's hard to like pinpoint what is it that that changed traffic but I I I'm wrong like there was not an apocalypse and I also don't think there will be an apocalypse. That's good. Actually there will be an apocalypse. I think that the users will shift and I think but it's not going to be one of these like sudden events. I think it's going to be one of these events where like in a year from now everyone's going to turn around and be like, "Oh yeah, yeah, that that old SEO stopped really mattering so much. We should have focused on more productled SEO." Yeah, makes sense. So I wanted to circle back to the product SEO thing a lever I wanted to pull on that I think is interesting. You said it was it was complic it's complicated to do product SEO. There's like many people involved. you have to change the company. But I'm guessing Eli is just not giving up generally like what techniques or like characteristics I mean if there aren't techniques what are the characteristics of companies that actually can accomplish this successfully are you like some examples are like is there certain role that you tend to report or like consult with that's more successful or there certain techniques you're need to be on Slack you need to talk to them weekly in a standup meeting like stuff like that. Is there anything that that might be helpful? Yeah, so generally I think SEO needs to have more soft skills. I don't think a lot of SEOs pride themselves on soft skills. I think they pride themselves on on technical abilities and you know abilities to find like understand APIs and Google and all that and algorithm leaks and al algorithm holes. But I I think soft skills are really important. So you just to be able to convince and explain how SEO might change the trajectory of growth of a company. But there's also reality there and this is like you know what I found from all of the lead calls I've I've taken over the last 6 years which is you have to be talking to the right people with the right goals. So if I'm talking to the CMO and they're gold on very specific things related to, you know, output of content or even rankings, there's nothing I can do that will shift them over to that mindset. I've been most successful when I talk to people with the growth title. So growth will straddle product and marketing and they have engineers. They are almost like product managers and they have more latitude to just choose like this is the way we're going to approach SEO. So, and then there then there are companies that like, you know, they're convinced that the CEO is convinced that the old way of SEO works. It's just not going to there's nothing I can do to convince them that they're wrong and that they need to do something else. So, I I think that's the the biggest learning, which is I can I can like show them the light, but if they're not willing to look at it, then they're nothing will change. There's certain companies that will do it and they're open to it and it's logical and they want to shift everything they're doing. There's a company that I've been talking to now for the last 6 months and they they won't pull the trigger on SEO and any SEO whatsoever and I I have finally uh bridged the gap and like I'm talking to them in you know more fruitful conversations because they brought the other teams in that had that goal. So I was talking to one team who like you know I met them at a conference and they're like oh we really should be doing that but they had no control and they're like it's you know belongs to another team and they have a different goal and all that but like things are slowly aligning and it's been like a six-month process of them internally saying hey check out Eli's newsletter or uh look at look at read Eli's book or like watch this video or you know check out this this podcast with Ross Hudgens. those kinds of things. They're bringing that other team along and I'm impressed that they're willing to go through that effort. But if they weren't willing to go through that effort, I was having a conversation with with someone who cannot action on anything I'm doing. And that's again that's the biggest reality that I've I've, you know, discovered both, you know, in consulting and in my full-time roles that not everyone will be receptive to it. And that's just the way it is. Yeah, it makes sense. That's an I think a very pattern matching thing on the chief growth officer. Shirana of Votes Setter said the exact same thing to me that she's interviewed several chief growth officer um people that she reported into as a product lead. She was like product SEO and she found those were most productive as well. So, um, it reminds me of, uh, I think I have a LinkedIn post going up on this soon of like anytime as someone comes to us for link building, they don't need link building. It's like some other problem and it's the the wrong mindset that you got to shift and that's very very difficult to do. But that's good to know that yeah, I should be looking for growth growth titles now about whether this going to go well or poorly. Yeah. I mean it's it's one of those things that I I I discovered when you know just approaching SEO from a product lens. So marketers are responsible for deliverables. Marketers are responsible for content or they may be responsible for reporting but product is responsible for like building something. So they may they may have less ability to do things on their own but they are because they're builders they're also allocated resources like they'll be allocated an engineer to do something or they'll be allocated you know this is the best part about being in product is they're allocated marketing itself to go action upon their product plans. So product I mean even better than growth is product but product is like they have the ability to really shape the way a company goes to market and if SEO is baked in they're shaping it with SEO and if SEO isn't baked in and this is very common of course is that they don't product doesn't care about SEO. If SEO is not baked in then it's marketing who's coming in either at the beginning or the end but not in the middle. So marketing product might go to marketing be like hey I need an SEO plan uh for how we're going to launch this product and then they don't revisit it they they accept whatever the marketing team sends over or they build the product without any regard for SEO and then they go to the marketers and be like SEO it. So like that's not very successful but when SEO is product it happens effectively. Eli you mentioned your newsletter productled seo.com great substack newsletter you're putting out weekly right? Is that fair to say? So go go check that out. Subscribe. Follow Eli on LinkedIn. X any Are you active anywhere else or where should people find you? Read the book. No, that's it. Read the book. I'm active on Amazon. Amazon. Are Oh, get it. There you go. Yes. One of the few. Yeah. All right. Eli, thanks for coming on. This is great. It's great. Good to see you again Russ. [Music]